Keywords
AI coding agents, agentic engineering, vibe coding, software engineering, AI productivity, coding efficiency, AI models, Claude code, GPT 5.4, AI prototyping, AI security, AI job market, AI tools, AI benchmarks, AI creativity., AI state of the union, software engineering, backlog of solutions, GitHub repositories, coding agents, test-driven development, prompt injection, lethal trifecta, open claw, data journalism, AI research, personal digital assistant, security vulnerabilities, programming techniques, AI tools.
Speakers
Speaker 1 (78%), Speaker 2 (22%), Speaker 3 (<1%)
A lot of people woke up in January and February and started realizing, Oh, wow, I can churn out 10,000 lines of code in a day. It used to be, you'd ask chat GPT for some code, and it would spit out some code. Then you have to run it and test it. The coding agents, they take that step for you, the open question for me is, how many other knowledge work fields are actually prone to these agent loops?
Now that we have this power. People almost underestimate what they do with it
today. Probably 95% of the code that I produce, I didn't type it myself. I write so much of my code on my phone, it's wild. I can get good work done walking the dog along the beach. My New Year's resolution every previous year, I've always told myself, this year I'm going to focus more, I'm going to take on less things. This year, my ambition was take on more stuff and be more ambitious. Such an interesting
contradiction. AI is supposed to make us more productive. It feels like the people that are most AI builder working harder than they've ever worked
using coding agents well is taking every inch of my 25 years of experience as a software engineer. I can fire up four agents in parallel and have them work on four different problems. By 11am I am wiped out. You have
this prediction that we're going to have a massive disaster at some point. You call it the Challenger disaster of AI.
Lots of people knew that those little O rings were unreliable, but every single time you get away with launching a space shuttle without the O rings failing, you institutionally feel more confident in what you're doing. We've been using these systems in increasingly unsafe ways. This is going to catch up with us. My prediction is that we're going to see a challenging disaster.
Today. My guest is Simon Willison. Simon, in my opinion, is one of the most important and useful voices right now on how AI is changing the way that we build software and how professional work is changing broadly. What I love about Simon is that he doesn't just pontificate in the clouds. He's been what you'd call a 10x engineer for over 20 years. He co created Django, the web framework that powers Instagram, Pinterest, Spotify and 1000s of other platforms. He coined the term prompt injection, popularized the ideas of AI sloth and agentic engineering, and amongst his 100 plus open source projects, he created data set, a data analysis tool that has become a staple of investigative journalism. What makes Simon rare is that very few engineers have made the leap from the old way of building to the new way, as fully and visibly as he has, and as he's leaned into this new way of building, he's been sharing everything he's learning in real time through his incredible blog, Simon wilson.net Simon does not do a lot of podcasts, and this conversation opened my mind up in a bunch of new ways. I am so excited for you to get to learn from Simon. Don't forget to check out Lenny's product, pass.com for an incredible set of deals available exclusively to Lenny's newsletter subscribers. With that, I bring you, Simon Willison,
you
Simon, thank you so much for being here, and welcome to the podcast.
Hey, Lenny, it's really great to be here.
I am so excited to have you here. I've been such a fan of yours. From afar for so long. I've learned so much from your blog. And even though every guest I have in this podcast is my favorite guest, you're my favorite kind of guest, because you're on the ground, building with the latest tools, using it for real. You're very good at articulating what you experience. So we're going to get a lot of ROI out of this, out of your brain from this time that we have together. What I want to start with is essentially an AI State of the Union. You've written about this November inflection?
Yes. So
what I'm thinking is we start just gonna give us, like, a brief history lesson of, just like, what happened in November and where are we today, what's possible now?
Well, let's, let's talk about all of 2025 very briefly, 2025 was the year that, especially anthropic and opening, I realized that code is the application, like being able to have these things generate code. I think partly because anthropic came up with Claude code back in sort of February of 2025, and it took off like crazy. And a bunch of people started signing up for $200 a month accounts. And so suddenly, wow, it turns out people are willing to pay a lot of money for this stuff, for that specific field. Both anthropic and open. Ai spent the whole of 2025 focusing all of their training efforts on coding. If you look at what they were doing, it was all the reinforcement learning stuff, the reasoning trick, the thing where the models say they're thinking, that was new in late 2024 like open ai 01 was the first model to exhibit that, and now all of the models do it. So that was the other big trend of last year was these reasoning models. Turns out reasoning is great for code. It can reason through code and figure out the root of bugs and all of that. And so the end result of this, the end result of these two labs throwing everything they had at making their models better at code, is in November, we had what I call the inflection point where GPT 5.1 and Claude Opus 4.5 came along, and they were both just they were incrementally better than the previous models, but in a way that crossed a threshold where, previously, if you had these coding agents, you could get them to write you some code, and most of the time it would mostly work, but you had to pay very close attention to it, and suddenly we went from that to
all.
Almost all of the time, it does what you told it to do, which makes all of the difference in the world. Now you can spin up a coding agent say, hey, build me a Mac application that does this thing, and you'll get something back, which still needs some back and forth, but it won't just be a buggy pile of rubbish that doesn't do anything. That was fascinating, because all of the software engineers who took time off over the over the holidays and started tinkering with this stuff, got this moment of realization where it's like, oh, wow, this stuff actually works. Now I could tell it to build code, and if I describe that code well enough, it'll follow the instructions and it'll build the thing that I asked it to build. I think the reverberations of that are still shaking us to software engineering. A lot of people woke up in January and February and started realizing, Oh, wow, this technology, which I've been kind of paying attention to, suddenly it's got really, really good. And what does that mean? Like, what does the fact like, I can churn out 10,000 lines of code in a day, and most of it works. Is that good? Like, how do we get from most of it works to all of it works? There are so many new questions that we're facing, which I think makes us a bellwether for other information workers, like code is easier than almost every other problem that you pose these agents, because code is obviously right or wrong, like it produces code you run the code either it works or it doesn't work. It might be a few subtle, hidden, hidden bugs, but generally you can tell if the thing actually works if it writes you an essay, if it writes you a law like prepares a law lawsuit for you, there are so it's so much harder to derive if it's actually done a good job, to figure out if it got things right or wrong. But it's kind of happening to us as software engineers. It came for us first, and we're figuring out, okay, what do our careers look like? How do we work as teams, when part of what we did that used to take look most of the time doesn't take most of the time anymore. What does that look like? And it's going to be very interesting seeing how this rolls out to other information work in the future.
This episode is brought to you by our season's presenting sponsor, work. OS, what do? Open AI anthropic, cursor, vercel, replit, Sierra clay and hundreds of other winning companies all have in common. They are all powered by workos. If you're building a product for the enterprise, you felt the pain of integrating Single Sign On skim, RBAC, audit logs and other features required by large companies. Workos turns those deal blockers into drop in APIs with a modern developer platform built specifically for B to B SaaS. Literally, every startup that I'm an investor in that starts to expand upmarket ends up working with workos, and that's because they are the best whether you are a seed stage startup trying to land your first enterprise customer or unicorn expanding globally, workos is the fastest path to becoming enterprise ready and unblocking growth. It's essentially stripe for enterprise features. Visit workos.com to get started or just hit up their slack, where they have actual engineers waiting to answer your questions. Workos allows you to build faster with delightful APIs, comprehensive docs and a smooth developer experience. Go to workos.com to make your app enterprise ready. Today I want to come back to just like, what is possible now. So just to give a little context, it's like, insane. How far we've come. I don't know, like, couple years ago, all code was human written. Then it's like, tap complete. Then it's like, Okay, now the best engineers are 100% AI code. Now it's like, I'm like, coding for my phone. Like, I'm not even looking at my code anymore. That's like,
I like, so much of my code in my phone, it's wild. Like, I can get good work done walking the dog along the beach, which is delightful. You know,
yeah, I had Boris journey on the pocket, and he's doing the same thing. And I was just like, is that even coding anymore? He's like, Yeah, it's just another level of abstraction. Just like, engineering has always gone talk about maybe, just like, what else is there around just like what is possible now with AI in terms of building that people may not fully recognize, and where do you think what's like the next leap? Is there anything beyond this?
Let's talk about the two, the sort of, there's the vibe coding side of things, and then there's the and I like, Andre carpet his original definition of vibe coding, which is when you don't even look at code, and you basically just go on the vibes. You say, Build me something that does x, and it builds it, and you play with it, and if it looks good, then great. And if it doesn't quite do it, you you keep on going back and forth, but it's very hands off. You're not looking at code. It's so he originally said, This is great for having fun and prototyping. And it then expand exploded way out of that. And I think today vibe coding is effectively, it's the definition I use is it's when you're not looking at the code, you don't care about code, and maybe you don't understand the code, like non programmers can now tell Claude what to build, and it can build in a little app. And I love that. I absolutely love that we're sort of democratizing the art of getting a computer to do stuff for you, of automating tedious things in your life by knocking out these little tools. Because the problem is that there is a limit on how much you can do with that responsibly. Like I like to tell people, if you're vibe coding something for yourself, where the only person who gets hurt, if it has bugs, is you. Yeah, go wild. That's completely fine. The moment you're vibe coding, code for other people to use where your bugs might actually harm somebody else, that's when you need to take a step back and say, Hang on a second. This is not a responsible way of using the these tools. The challenge is that understanding what's responsible and what isn't is in itself a sort of expert level skill. So knowing that once you start dealing with like scraping of people's websites, maybe you'll damage their websites, but hitting them too hard, there are so many ways that you can cause damage if you don't know what you're doing. But I love that liberation, and I love that people can come to meetings with a prototype that they knocked up of that idea, that illustrates that idea. I think those things are wonderful. The big debate, the ongoing debate, has been, what do we call it? When a professional software engineer uses these tools to write real code that's production ready, that they've reviewed and they've checked all of the details of a lot of people call that vibe coding as well. I think that devalues vibe coding as a term, because it's useful to say I vibe coded this, as in, I haven't even looked at how it works. It's not production ready, but it's kind of a cool prototype the moment vibe coding means everything involved that touches AI, it effectively ends up needing programming, because we're all moving in the direction where our code is mediated through AI at some point. So what do we call it? For professionals, I've gone with agentic engineering, because I think the thing to emphasize is these coding agents, right? If you're asking chatgpt to knock out some code, that's a different thing from if you're running Codex and having it write the code, debug the code, test the code, all of that. And I think that agentic engineering is such a deep and fascinating discipline, because the art of getting really good results out of this, like the art of having them help you build software you could deploy to a million people. That's not that's never going to be easy, that's never going to be trivial, that's always going to require a great deal of depth of experience in what software and how software works, and how how these agents work. And I love that. That's I'm kind of writing a book about it. Now that I'm publishing a chapter at a time on my blog, that the best form of writing, because I don't have an editor or any pressure from a publisher, is just when I feel like writing another chapter, I can I can do that, but there's so much to discuss. But yeah, so I think right now, the frontier is, how do we build professional software using coding agents? How do we build software that is, I don't just want to build software that's that's good. I want us to build software that is better than we were building before, like if the agents let us move a bit faster, but we're still churning out the same quality of software. That's less interesting to me than if the software we're producing has less bugs, more features. It's higher quality, it's better software because we're harnessing these tools the really interesting future is something which some people have been calling the dark factory pattern or software factories. This is the idea where, right now, if you're a professional using these tools, the way you do it is you tell them what to build, and then you look at the code and you review that code really carefully and make sure it's doing the right thing. What does it look like if you're not reviewing the code, if you're not looking that code, but you're also not vibe coding. You're not throwing everything to the wind and seeing what happened. You're applying professional practices and quality expectations to code that you're not directly reviewing. The reason it's called the Dark factory is there's this ID idea in factory automation, that if your factory is so automated that you don't need any people there, you can turn the lights off like the machines can operate in complete darkness if you don't need people on the factory floor. What does that look like for software? And there's some very interesting this company called strong DM, has been pushing this and doing some really interesting experiments around this that I think, is the net that's, that's futuristic, like that's, we're trying to figure out what that looks like and how we can responsibly build software in that way right now, and making some quite interesting like discoveries about things that work and things that don't work. But that, to me, is the next, the next sort of barrier.
Let's follow that thread. So what is, what is this factory doing? So there's an element of, no one's looking at the code, really. But what? How does that change how software is built? Are they? Are people still coming up with the ideas and telling you this factory building? Oh,
exactly, this is. The fascinating thing is, so there's a policy of, nobody writes any code, and quite a few companies are beginning to introduce that now, because,
just to be clear, the policy is, you cannot write code it has
you cannot type code into a computer Exactly. And honestly, like I thought six months ago, I thought that was crazy. And today, probably 95% of the code that I produce I didn't type it myself. So that world, which is practical already, because these the latest models, are good enough that you can tell them, Oh no, rename that variable and refactor that and add this line there, and they'll just do and it's faster than you typing on the keyboard yourself. The next rule, though, is nobody reads the code. And this is the thing which strong DM started doing back in I think it was August last year. They said, Okay, we're not going to read the code. So what does that mean? How do you produce software that works? And. Good if you're not reading the code, and they've come up with a whole bunch of answers. One of the most interesting was the way they did testing, where, in traditional software, some companies will have a QA department, like the engineers write a bunch of software, and then you throw it over the wall to the QA department, and they sort of test it furiously to figure out if it's working or not. That I think went out of fashion a bit over the past sort of five to 10 years, from what I've seen in Silicon Valley, because you kind of want your engineers to take responsibility for the code they're writing being good. But what if you can simulate that QA department? So what strong DM were doing is they had a swarm of agent testers who were actually simulating custom simulating end users. So the software that they were building, this is crazy. The software is security software for access management. So when you sign it, when you start as a company, and somebody needs to assign you access to JIRA, and then give you access to Slack and all of that kind of thing they were building software for that that's very security, like adjacent that's not the kind of thing that you should be vibe coding at all based on most people's understanding of how the world works, but that's and there are. So they're a legitimate security company who've been doing this stuff without AI for years. So it's not like they didn't understand the risks. So the way they did their testing is they had this swarm of simulated employees all in a simulated Slack channel saying things like, hey, could somebody give me access to JIRA? The Slack channel itself is simulated. We'll talk about that in a moment. And they 24 hours a day. They're making requests and saying, Hey, I need access to JIRA, and all of those kinds of things at enormous cost. Like they were spending $10,000 a day on tokens. I think simulating these end users. I believe so. But it meant that their software was being tech very robustly tested in all of these different ways. And yeah, it's kind of familiar to having a similar to having a manual QA team, except one that never sleeps. And I thought that was fascinating as a sort of example of thinking outside of the box. Taking this question, how do we tell our software is good if we're not reviewing the code and trying to find creative answers to it. The other thing that was interesting is that the Slack channel itself wasn't actually slack, because it turns out, if you test against real software like Slack and so forth, they all have rate limits and like, they won't let you just run 10,000 simulated people at a time. So what they did is they built their own simulation of slack and JIRA and Okta and all of this software they were integrating with. And the way they did that is they basically took the API documentation for the public APIs for slack and the client libraries that the open source client libraries, and they told their coding agents, build this. Build build me a simulation of this API. And they did so this company is and this is one of the things that I went to a demo that they gave back in October, one of the things that really sat with me is that they had their own simulated version of slack and JIRA and all of these different package, different systems that they could then build their software against, which cost them nothing, because once they spun it up, it was a little go binary that sat there. And they even had interfaces. They had, like a fake version of the slack interface that they'd Co A like vibe coded up that let them see what was going on. Absolutely fascinating.
That is such a cool story. And I love these stories of just companies at the bleeding edge trying to see what's possible and have an advantage, essentially. So what I'm hearing here is the QA piece is like the new piece in this factory. So we, you know, we already have codecs cloud code, they can go off and build stuff. Is the innovation here? Okay, now you've built all this stuff. Is it actually any good? Is there a reason, like Codex and cloud code couldn't do this themselves? Why do you need kind of this
factory concept? I think they can, like you can tell Claude code fire up a sub agent that uses playwright to simulate a browser and all of that kind of thing. You'd have trouble getting it to run 24 hours a day. I mean, maybe it would work, but certainly, I think that what's interesting to me isn't so much the software you're using. It is these, these big ideas, these, these, these techniques that you're using to try and answer these questions. Because even if your QA team, your virtual QA team, says this is good, doesn't mean it's secure, right? It doesn't mean that you've got all of those other characteristics you care about. At the same time, the agents are getting really good at security penetration testing now, and this is a new thing, I think, in the past, again, in the past, sort of three to six months, they've started being credible as security researchers, which is sending shockwaves through the security research industry, they were like, wow, we didn't think that they'd get to this point. What's interesting there is, both open AI and anthropic have specialist security models that they will not release to the general public because they can be used to break into websites. So they have, like, invite only, like registered security researchers can apply for access, and they've been producing vulnerability reports against popular open source software, I think Firefox, just a few days ago, maybe last week, said that they'd done a release which was assisted by anthropic. Anthropic had discovered 100 like potential vulnerabilities in Firefox and. Responsibly reported them to Mozilla, who then fixed them. That's an interesting one as well, because we're seeing a lot of this in the wild, and it's it's just incredibly frustrating for maintainers, because there are these people who don't know what they're doing, who are asking chat GPT to find a security hole and then reporting it to the maintainer and the report looks good, like chat GPT can produce a very well formatted report of a vulnerability. It's a total waste of time, like, it's not actually verified as being a real problem. The difference with anthropic and Firefox is the anthropic security team actually did do the work. They didn't report whatever the agent said. They actually verified that it was a good quality report before they handed it over. There's gonna be a
lot to talk about in the security side. You've done a lot of thinking and writing about the dangers there, but I want to follow this thread. So in terms of what AI has been doing for teams, if you think about it's like, it's kind of going on the middle and expanding so it's like writing, you know, it's it's taking on more and more of the building components. It's doing code reviews now at QA, as you've been describing, constantly building. And it feels like the front of that is the big now gap in opportunity, which is coming up with the idea, what the heck should we build? Because then once you tell the AI, build this thing as you're describing, it's getting better and better at building something great. Have you had any luck yet with using AI there, and do you think it starts to eat that and just becomes the strategy, you know? PM, basically.
So this is one of the most interesting problems we're having with all of this, is we've taken the writing code bit and we've massively accelerated that. Now the bottlenecks are everywhere else, right? Like, how do we redesign our processes now that the bit that used to take the longest, right? It used to be, you've come up with the spec, and you hand it to your engineering team, and three weeks later, if you're lucky, they'd come back with an implementation for you to then start. And now that that maybe that takes three hours, depending on how well established the coding agents are for that kind of thing. So now what? Right now, where else are the bottlenecks? I don't think it's, I mean, there's coming with the initial ideas. Anyone who's done any product work knows that your initial ideas are always wrong. What matters is proving them right. It's testing them. We can test things so much faster now, because we can build workable prototypes so much quicker. So there's an interesting thing I've been doing in my own work, where any sort of feature that I want design, I'll often prototype three different ways it could work, because that takes very little time. And then I can start experimenting them and trying them and seeing which ones I like. And that that feels to me like the really transformational step here is that when you get AI involved in your ideation phase, it's much more about the prototypes. It's about okay, we can see like a UI prototype is free now chat, GPT and Claude will just build you a very convincing UI for anything that you describe, and that's how you should be working. I think anyone who's doing sort of product design isn't vibe coding little prototypes is missing out on the latest but like the most powerful sort of boost that we get in that step. But then what do you do? Right? How do you given your three options now that you have instead of one option, how do you prove to yourself which one of those is the best? I don't have a confident answer to that. I expect. This is where the good old fashioned usability testing comes in, like, get somebody on Zoom screen shared using your software see what happens. That's you can tell the AI to do it, and you can simulate your users with the AI. I don't think that's credible. I don't think you're going to get as good results from chat GBT pretending to click around on your prototype than you would from an actual human
being. This is so interesting. A question I've been tackling is just where are human brains going to continue to be valuable? And what I'm hearing here is there's like the initial idea. You made such a good point here. It's like the initial idea is often not the actual winning idea. It's just the beginning of an idea. So there's like, the idea for the future. Then there's the try it out, prototype it. Help you narrow on the direction, build it. Make it awesome, get it out into the world. And it feels to me like AI is going to be really good at suggesting ideas and coming up with initial ideas. And I wonder if the human brain, like, it's not like, maybe someday we don't need human brains at all, and that's all of the discussion. But maybe the next phase is AI will help us come up with great ideas.
I mean, that's been the case for probably a couple of years now. They've been strong enough to do really good brainstorming. And I like to compare it to the thing where, when you've got a group brainstorming exercise, you book a meeting room for an hour, you've got a whiteboard, you get a dozen people in, and the first two thirds of that brainstorming session, honestly, it's kind of just everyone going through the most obvious, basic ideas, right? And you get them all out on the whiteboard, you get them all up, and then things get interesting when you start saying, Okay, well, let's talk about these. Let's start combining them. The AI is so good at that first two thirds of the ideas, like I brainstorm with them all the time, where I just get them to spit out all of the obvious stuff, and they'll come up with 20 things, and they'll all be kind of done well, they won't be. They just won't be very interesting. And what gets interesting is when, if you ask them for 20 more and now they by the sort of end of that list, you're beginning to get things which are not good ideas, but they point you in interesting directions. There are so many other tricks like this. Like you can tell, you can you can tell AI to combine weird fields. You can say, Okay, I want ideas for marketing my new SaaS platform, inspired by marine biology, and you see what happens, and most of it will be complete junk, but there might be a spark that gets you to the good idea. So I love them as brainstorming companions. On that front that reminds me of a chat I had with David plastic. He's an expert naming person. He helps companies come up with names for products, and one of the things that he does at his company is he creates three teams to come to brainstorm names one team. So for example, let's say windsurf was a product they named. So the first team is, okay, this is an AI IDE thing. That's that's exactly what it is. Second Team is okay. This is a this is a boat. You're naming a boat. And here's constraints. And then here, this
is a spaceship. So name it from that perspective, and he finds the best names come from those other directions, where it's a different metaphor with the same sort of benefits. Okay, so what I'm hearing here is, this is good. This good for humans right now that there's still opportunity for us to contribute to the process.
And actually, I want to stand in defense of software engineers for a bit, because, on the one hand, these things can write code that used to be our thing, right? I'm finding that using coding agents well is taking every inch of my 25 years of experience as a software engineer, and it is mentally exhausting like this is something which people are talking a lot more about now. I can fire up like four agents in parallel and have him work on four different problems, and by like, 11am I am wiped out for the day, like I have because there is a limit on human cognition in how much, even if you're not reviewing everything you're doing, just how much you can hold in your head at one time. And it's very easy to pop that stack at the moment, like there's a sort of personal skill that we have to learn, which is finding our new limits. Like, what is, what is a responsible way for us to you, to not burn out and for us to use the time that we have. And I've talked to a lot of people who are losing sleep because they're like, my coding agents could my agents could be doing work for me. I'll just gonna stay up an extra half hour and set off a bunch of extra things, and they're waking up in the morning. That's all money. That's obviously unsustainable. I hope that that's a novelty thing that agents only really got good in the past, sort of four to five months. We're all learning what that looks like and what that lets us do. But it's concerning. There's an element of sort of gambling and addiction to how we're using some of these tools. But to stand in defensive software engineers, I get great results out of these things because they are amplifiers of existing skills and experience. And I have 25 years of existing, like pre AI experience, which I can now amplify, because I can talk to the agents at a very high level. I can use very I can use sophisticated engineering, like language that I've mastered over the years, which they appear to know as well, and we can collaborate incredibly effectively. It means I can look at a problem and I can say this problem is a one sentence prompt, and I know it'll find that bug and fix that bug, as opposed to this other problem, which is, who knows how big a problem? There is a flip side to this, which is that I've got 25 years of experience in how long it takes to build something, and that's all completely gone like that doesn't work anymore, because I can look at a problem say, Okay, well, this is going to take two weeks. It's not worth it. And now it's like, yeah, but maybe it's going to take 20 minutes. Because the reason it would have taken two weeks was all of the sort of crafty coding things that the AI is now covering for us, and that I've been finding really interesting and challenging. I constantly throw tasks at AI that I don't think it'll be able to do, because every now and then it does it, and when it doesn't do it, you learn, right? You learn, okay, Opus 4.6 still can't do this particular thing, but when it does do something, especially something the previous models couldn't
do,
that's actually cutting edge AI research. You can be the first person in the world to spot that AI can now do X just because you were the person you found it. Couldn't do it, and you've been keeping that sort of backlog of interesting tasks for it.
There's such an interesting line of discussion this idea that, let's say 10x engineers, to use that phrase, are going to be more valuable is what you're describing here, because you can work with these tools much more effectively. What do you think of junior engineers, just like what's happening there? What's their future?
So there's an interest. So thought works the big like it. Consultancy did a off site a few about a month ago, and they produced, they got a whole bunch of engineering VPs in from different companies to talk about this stuff, and one of the interesting theories they came up with is they think this stuff is really good for experienced engineers, like it amplifies their skills. That's great. It's really good for new engineers because it solves so many of those onboarding problems, like, if you talk to Cloudflare and Shopify, both said they were hiring 1000 1000 interns over the course of 2025 because the intern onboarding costs. It used to be takes a month before your intern can do anything useful. Now they're doing something useful within, like a week, because the the AI assistant helps them get up and running faster. The problem is the people in the middle, like, if you're mid career, if you haven't made it to sort of super senior engineer yet, but you're not sort of new either. That's the that's the group which thought works, which ThoughtWorks resolved, were probably in the most trouble right now. Like, that's the open question, because they don't have that expertise to amplify and use with these tools, and it's not as benefit, like they've got all of the boosts that the beginners were getting, they've got already. So that's an interesting open question right now, for me, it's more the sort of mid mid level, as opposed to the beginners or the advanced people.